Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 000, 1–5 (2007)
Printed 12 June 2013
(MN LATEX style ﬁle v2.2)
Galaxy peculiar velocities and evolution-bias
Will J. Percival⋆ and Bj¨orn Malte Sch¨afer
Institute of Cosmology and Gravitation, University of Portsmouth, Mercantile House, Hampshire Terrace, Portsmouth P01 2EG, United Kingdom
12 June 2013
ABSTRACT
Galaxy bias can be split into two components: a formation-bias based on the locations of
galaxy creation, and an evolution-bias that details their subsequent evolution. In this letter
we consider evolution-bias in the peaks model. In this model, galaxy formation takes place
at local maxima in the density ﬁeld, and we analyse the subsequent peculiar motion of these
galaxies in a linear model of structure formation. The peak restriction yields differences in
the velocity distribution and correlation between the galaxy and the dark matter ﬁelds, which
causes the evolution-bias component of the total bias to evolve in a scale-dependent way. This
mechanism naturally gives rise to a change in shape between galaxy and matter correlation
functions that depends on the mean age of the galaxy population. This model predicts that
older galaxies would be more strongly biased on large scales compared to younger galaxies.
Our arguments are supported by a Monte-Carlo simulation of galaxy pairs propagated using
the Zel’dovich-approximation for describing linear peculiar galaxy motion.
Key words: cosmology: large-scale structure, galaxies: general, methods: analytical
1 INTRODUCTION
A number of interesting observational results have recently been
published related to the bias of galaxies. On large scales k <
0.2 h Mpc−1, the clustering of the 2dFGRS (Colless et al. 2003)
and SDSS (York et al. 2000) main galaxies is signiﬁcantly differ-
ent (Cole et al. 2005; Percival et al. 2007; Sanchez & Cole 2007):
There is an excess of clustering for the SDSS main sample galax-
ies on scales greater than k < 0.2 h Mpc−1, which is not seen in
the 2dFGRS galaxies. If uncorrected, this impacts on cosmologi-
cal parameter measurements utilising the power spectrum shape. If
the SDSS main galaxy sample is split by luminosity, we see that the
bias depends on the r-band galaxy luminosity (Tegmark et al. 2004;
Percival et al. 2007); and a similar trend was observed in the 2dF-
GRS sample (Norberg et al. 2001). If the SDSS galaxies are split
in both colour and luminosity, red galaxies are more clustered than
blue galaxies, but this is not a simple trend (Swanson et al. 2007).
Red galaxies have the strongest relative bias on large scales inde-
pendent of luminosity, while the bias of blue galaxies appears to
rise monotonically with luminosity. In addition, there appear to be
a number of cosmic conspiracies when considering the cosmolog-
ical evolution of clustering of different galaxy classes. The ampli-
tude of the clustering of the SDSS LRGs remains roughly constant
with redshift (Eisenstein et al. 2005; Tegmark et al. 2006). In this
case, the growth over time of the matter power spectrum is approx-
imately canceled by a drop in the average bias. Croom et al. (2005)
considered the evolution of the clustering amplitude of quasars in
the 2dFQRS: They found that the amplitude of quasar clustering
increases with increasing redshift. If quasars Poisson sample the
⋆ E-mail: will.percival@port.ac.uk
c(cid:13) 2007 RAS
matter distribution in the Universe, however, then we would rather
expect their large-scale clustering amplitude to be proportional to
the linear growth factor, decreasing with increasing redshift. There
is therefore still a great deal still to understand about galaxy bias.
Models of galaxy bias depend on two different processes, in
addition to the clustering of the underlying matter ﬁeld: formation-
bias describes the effect of galaxies forming at local extrema in
the density ﬁeld. These galaxies then move following the large-
scale matter velocity ﬁeld, resulting in evolution-bias. Although the
galaxies may move locally with the matter velocity ﬁeld, their pe-
culiar velocity distribution does not have to match that of the mat-
ter. Ultimately, evolution-bias will lead galaxies to merge together,
reducing their number density and changing the clustering proper-
ties of the population as a whole. In the simplest model of struc-
ture growth, galaxies are always hosted within a halo whose mass
increases with time. In such a picture, evolution-bias is matched
by the increase in the average halo mass which hosts a particular
galaxy, after it has formed. A stronger evolution-bias growth in-
dicates an increased likelihood of rapid halo mass growth through
a continual merging process. In order to model the bias of an ob-
served galaxy population we also need to include the observational
selection function of the sample, which will include the galaxy for-
mation time distributions.
Of the decomposition of galaxy bias into the two components,
it is expected that the formation-bias is the largest contributor for
almost all galaxy populations: the peaks formalism (Bardeen et al.
1986) predicts a strong clustering amplitude for galaxy formation
at high redshift, which takes the matter ﬁeld a long time to match.
Formation-bias evolves strongly with redshift so, for a popula-
tion of similar galaxies observed at different redshifts, this will
dominate the change in the bias with time. This is different from
2 W.J. Percival and B.M. Sch¨afer
evolution-bias, which gives the change in the bias of the same set
of galaxies.
Driven by the observational results discussed above, we now
reconsider evolution-bias from a theoretical point of view. Al-
though galaxy formation itself is a non-linear process, the veloc-
ity ﬁeld of galaxies on large scales can be sufﬁciently well de-
scribed using linear theory. Previous work on evolution-bias has
assumed a local model where the distribution of galaxy velocities
matches that of the density ﬁeld (Fry 1996; Tegmark & Peebles
1998). This simpliﬁes the relevant formulae, and an analytic de-
scription of evolution-bias is achievable (this method is reviewed in
Sect. 2). However, if galaxies formed at the peaks of the smoothed
density ﬁeld, the expected distributions of the galaxy peculiar ve-
locities and of the matter ﬁeld will not match (Bardeen et al. 1986).
This effect is due to the nonzero covariance between the velocity
ﬁeld and the density gradient and complicates the evolution-bias
scenario introduced by Fry (1996). We outline the theory of this ap-
proach in Sects. 3 and 4, describe the Monte-Carlo sampling tech-
nique we use to follow evolution-bias in Sect. 5 and summarise in
Sect. 6.
Throughout, the cosmological model assumed is the standard
ΛCDM cosmology with adiabatic initial perturbations. Choices
for the relevant parameter values are: Ωm = 0.25, ΩΛ = 0.75,
H0 = 100 h km s−1Mpc−1 with h = 0.72, Ωb = 0.04, ns = 1
and σ8 = 0.8. For the matter power spectrum we make the
ansatz P(k) ∝ kns T 2(k) with the transfer T (k) function given by
Bardeen et al. (1986) and the shape parameter given by (Sugiyama
1995). Where necessary, we impose a Gaussian smoothing on the
density ﬁeld with the ﬁlter scale rscale, which is related to the mass
scale Mscale = 4π/3Ωmρcritr3
scale of the objects considered.
2 ANALYTIC MODELS OF EVOLUTION-BIAS
2.1 Limit of small overdensities
Following the derivation of Fry (1996), we assume that the pe-
culiar velocities of galaxies match those of the matter ﬁeld at the
same locations, υ. The continuity equation for the galaxy density
can be written ∂tρgal = −div(ρgalυ), and for the matter ∂tρCDM =
−div(ρCDM υ). By deﬁning δ ≡ ρ/ ¯ρ − 1, the continuity equation
for the matter reduces to ∂tδCDM(a) = −divυ(a), for small δCDM.
Solving the system consisting of the continuity and Euler-equations
yields the result that the evolution of δCDM is driven by the standard
linear growth factor D(a), so that δCDM(a) = D(a)δCDM(1), with
D(1) = 1 at present day.
If (δgal − δCDM) is small everywhere, then δgal(a) satisﬁes
the same linear continuity equation as δCDM(a), giving ˙δgal(a) =
−divυ(a). In this limit,
δgal(a) = δgal(1) + (D(a) − 1)δCDM(1).
Note that the assumption of small (δgal−δCDM) is important, because
the densities of the dark matter and galaxy ﬁelds need to be matched
in the full continuity equations, in order for the expected growth in
δgal to be equal to that of δCDM. This assumption is equivalent to
stating that the distribution of the peculiar velocities of the galaxies
is the same as that of the matter ﬁeld.
2.2 Starting from linear bias
This idea has been extended by Fry (1996), who considered a
galaxy overdensity ﬁeld with a linear bias at present day δgal(1) =
b(1)δCDM(1). Substituting this into eqn. (1) gives δgal(a) = [D(a) −
1 + b(1)]δCDM(1). In this model the linear bias is is related to the
growth function by
D(a) − 1 + b(1)
Furthermore Tegmark & Peebles (1998) considered the evolution-
bias of galaxies following the more general stochastic bias model
of Dekel & Lahav (1999) and derive cross correlations between the
matter density and galaxy ﬁelds. To simplify the analysis we follow
Tegmark & Peebles (1998) and deﬁne the vector
x(a) =   δCDM(a)
δgal(a)
Forcing the galaxy overdensity ﬁeld to obey the bias model of
Dekel & Lahav (1999) at present day allows the galaxy and dark
matter distributions to be related by an additional correlation coef-
ﬁcient r. At present day, the covariance matrix can be written
C(1) ≡ hx(1)xt(1)i = hδ2
CDM(1)i 
b(1)r(1)
b(1)r(1)
In this notation, the continuity equation for the galaxy overdensity
ﬁeld coupled with the linear growth factor for the matter gives
x(a) = M(a)x(1) , where M ≡   D(a)
D(a) − 1
The corresponding evolution of the covariance matrix C(a) =
M(a)C(1)Mt(a) shows that the evolution of the galaxy overdensity
ﬁeld can be rewritten in terms of r(a) and b(a) (Tegmark & Peebles
1998), and that the bias model does not change its form. For r = 1,
the formula reduces to the relation of Fry (1996).
2.3 Bias for Gaussian random ﬁelds
In work predating Fry (1996) and Tegmark & Peebles (1998),
Bardeen et al. (1986) considered the evolution of bias for galaxies
that form at peaks of the density ﬁeld after smoothing on a cer-
tain mass scale. On large scales, the peak density ﬁeld can be con-
sidered as a continuous Gaussian random ﬁeld itself, statistically
independent and uncorrelated with the background, which drives
the dynamics of the galaxies. The galaxy and matter density ﬁeld
evolve independently due to the peak-background split, as indepen-
dent k-modes are important for their respective evolution.
Using this model Bardeen et al. (1986) showed that the large-
scale bias evolves as b(a) ∝ δc/σM(a) + 1 for a smoothed Gaus-
sian density ﬁeld with variance σM(a), where δc is the overdensity
threshold above which galaxies form. On linear scales, the vari-
ance of the density ﬁeld σM(a) is proportional to the linear growth
factor σM(a) ∝ D(a). Consequently, if we normalise the bias at
present day, we recover eqn. (2) for the evolution of the bias. A key
assumption made in the derivation is the treatment of the galaxy
distribution as a continuous ﬁeld and that the evolution in the co-
moving number density of peaks is driven by the evolution of the
background density, which is in effect a reformulation of the conti-
nuity equation for the galaxy ﬁeld: Forcing the number density of
galaxies to evolve with the background density is akin to the as-
sumption of small (δgal − δCDM) that led to the linearised continuity
equation for the galaxy ﬁeld.
c(cid:13) 2007 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–5
3 STRUCTURE GROWTH FROM PAIR VELOCITIES
The above descriptions of evolution-bias can also be understood in
terms of the peculiar velocities of a discrete set of galaxies. The
variance of the peculiar velocity distribution for each galaxy is
[aH(z) f ]2
dk P(k),
where H(z) is the Hubble parameter and f ≡ d log D/d log a. If we
assume that δ is small everywhere, the expected infall velocity is
zero for all pairs of galaxies: we are as likely to choose galaxies that
are moving apart (in comoving space), as peaks moving together.
If galaxy peculiar velocities were uncorrelated, the galaxy density
ﬁeld would not develop clustering as any initial clustering pattern
will be destroyed by the random diffusion. This is not the case for
velocity ﬁelds driven by correlated Gaussian random overdensity
ﬁelds as the velocities of galaxy pairs of separation r are correlated
according to
Cυ(r) = hυ1 · υ2i =
[aH(z) f ]2
dk P(k) j0(kr).
Velocities of pairs of galaxies will be strongly correlated when r
is small as both galaxies preferentially move in the same direction,
being part of the same bulk ﬂow, but velocities of galaxy pairs with
large separations are less strongly correlated. This difference means
that there is a net inﬂux of galaxy pairs from large to small sepa-
rations, which leads to the growth in the clustering strength. For a
pair of galaxies of separation r, the variance of the peculiar velocity
difference is
h|υ1 − υ2|2i = 2[σ2
where σ2
υ − Cυ(r)],
υ is a diffusion term.
Changing the selection criteria of galaxy pair-velocities natu-
rally changes the evolution of galaxy clustering. An extreme exam-
ple of a galaxy ﬁeld with an evolution-bias would be the assump-
tion that galaxies only form at locations where the peculiar velocity
υ = 0. After formation, galaxies at these locations do not move, and
the galaxy overdensity and clustering properties are constant in co-
moving space. In contrast to the model proposed by Bardeen et al.
(1986), this is not physically motivated, because there is no a-priori
reason to link places in the velocity ﬁeld where υ ≃ 0 with galaxy
formation. The derivation leading to eqn. (1) breaks down for this
model because it relied on matching the galaxy and matter over-
density ﬁelds, which is clearly broken. In this situation, the galax-
ies still locally “move with the matter” although the distribution of
galaxy velocities does not match the distribution of velocities of the
dark matter.
4 EVOLUTION-BIAS IN THE PEAKS FORMALISM
We now consider the evolution of a set of galaxies that form at the
peaks of a smoothed density ﬁeld, where there is the most rapid
increase in density. After formation, the galaxies leave the peaks,
whose positions are ﬁxed in comoving space, and move with the
matter ﬂow.
We wish to estimate the average velocity of a matter concen-
tration at a peak in the ﬁeld, so we will need to consider the density
and velocity ﬁelds after smoothing by a ﬁlter of width rsmooth. The
velocity dispersion and correlation can be calculated by replacing
P(k) with the smoothed power spectrum ¯P(k) in eqns. (6), (7) and
(8). For large separations r ≫ rsmooth, the Bessel function in eqn (7)
takes precedence over the smoothing of the ﬁeld, and Cυ(r) tends
c(cid:13) 2007 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–5
Peculiar velocities and evolution-bias
Figure 1. The expected variance for velocities in a Gaussian random ﬁeld
smoothed with a Gaussian ﬁlter (solid lines), and for the unsmoothed ﬁeld
(dotted lines), plotted against smoothing scale parametrised by the mass en-
closed within the ﬁlter (upper lines). The expected velocity correlation be-
tween two points separated by 200 h−1 Mpc, under the same assumptions
are shown by the lower lines. The decrease in velocity variance caused
by additionally selecting sampling points with vanishing gradient in the
smoothed density ﬁeld is indicated by the dashed lines.
towards the value for the unsmoothed ﬁeld. In contrast, the variance
of the velocity for each galaxy σ2
υ (eqn. 6), which is independent
of r, does depend on the smoothing applied to the ﬁeld. The effects
of the smoothing scale on σ2
υ and Cυ(r) are shown in Fig. (1), for a
pair separation of 200 h−1 Mpc.
In order to select peaks in the smoothed density ﬁeld, we need
to set two further constraints on the galaxy locations: The density
gradient has to be zero, and the local curvature needs to be posi-
tive deﬁnite. Because the velocities are correlated with the density
gradient, placing galaxies at locations where the gradient is zero
reduces the velocity variance σ2
υ from that of eqn (6) by a factor
(1 − γ2
υ) (Bardeen et al. 1986; Szalay & Jensen 1987; Peacock et al.
1987), where
σ−1σ1
and σ2
= 4πZ ∞
dk k2 j+2P(k).
For a smoothed ﬁeld, P(k) needs to be replaced by ¯P(k) with the
consequence that γυ → 1 as rsmooth → ∞. In the limit of large r, the
velocity correlation function is unchanged by the peak constraint:
In this limit, velocity-velocity correlations dominate over velocity-
gradient, or gradient-gradient correlations because of the additional
k−1 terms in the velocity-dependent integrands. The effect of in-
cluding both the smoothing of the ﬁeld and the zero-gradient selec-
tion criteria on σ2
υ and Cυ(r) is shown in Fig. (1), for a pair separa-
tion of 200 h−1 Mpc.
The reduction of the dispersion element of eqn. (8), while
keeping the growth component ﬁxed will lead to a scale-dependent
increase in the 2-point galaxy correlation function (Regos & Szalay
(1995) also comment on this). From this it is clear that propagating
galaxies along their velocity vectors does not preserve the shape
of the correlation function, and the bias evolution formalism devel-
oped in Sect. 2 breaks down.
4 W.J. Percival and B.M. Sch¨afer
Figure 2. The correlation function at z = 0 (circles), z = 1 (triangles) and
z = 2 (squares) calculated from a Monte-Carlo realisation of 108 indepen-
dent pairs of points in a Gaussian random ﬁeld. These are compared with
the expected correlations for linear growth (dashed lines). On large scales,
ξ(r) becomes negative because we only sample pairs of galaxies with initial
separation < 100 h−1 Mpc.
5 MONTE-CARLO SIMULATION OF GALAXY PAIR
PROPERTIES
We use the formalism introduced by Regos & Szalay (1995) to set
up a Gaussian random process for determining velocity variances
and correlations in the large-scale structure. Regos & Szalay (1995)
show how a 26 × 26 covariance matrix can be constructed for the
multi-variate Gaussian distribution of the properties (overdensity,
3 gradient components, 6 curvature components and 3 velocity
components) of pairs of points in a smoothed Gaussian random
ﬁeld. The matrix depends on the power spectrum moments given
in eqn. (9) and from the functions of the pair separation r given by
Kℓm = 4πZ ∞
dk km jl(kr) ¯P(k).
Using these covariance matrices, we can randomly draw realisa-
tions of the properties of pairs of points in the ﬁeld, assuming they
follow a multi-variate Gaussian distribution. We can also add con-
straints on the pairs selected, such as that they must both be at a
peak in the ﬁeld.
We ﬁrst demonstrate that this procedure can reproduce the
linear growth expected for the matter ﬁeld. We have produced a
Monte-Carlo realisation of 108 pairs of galaxies using the proce-
dure described above, without any additional constraints on pair se-
lection. This corresponds to choosing random locations in a matter
ﬁeld. The peculiar velocities were then used to estimate the motion
of galaxies in linear structure formation using the Zel’dovich ap-
proximation. This is applicable for small displacements, and should
therefore accurately describe the initial effect of evolution-bias af-
ter galaxy formation. The dynamical model is affected by the prop-
erties of the particular dark energy model through the growth func-
tion D(a), which affects the peculiar velocities. From these data,
we have calculated ξ(r) for z = 0, 1, 2, assuming that the galaxy
pairs evolve from an initial unclustered comoving distribution (as
expected for the matter in the Universe, which is initially homo-
Figure 3. The expected amplitude of the pair-velocity as a function of pair-
separation for peaks selected for halos of mass 1010...15 M⊙ (solid lines).
Increasing the halo mass leads to larger infall velocities. These curves
were calculated from 107 independent pairs of peaks, although each was
weighted as described in the text, so these correspond to a much smaller
effective number of pairs. The expected pair-velocity for locations selected
at random in the matter distribution is shown by the dotted line.
geneous). The correlation functions are plotted in Fig. 2 showing
excellent agreement with the expected linear evolution.
We now consider galaxies that form at peaks in this ﬁeld. The
additional criteria applied within our Monte-Carlo procedure to en-
sure that we select peaks are
(i) overdensity threshold δ > δc = 1.69,
(ii) gradient ∇δ = 0,
(iii) positive deﬁnite curvature matrix.
Peaks are rare, so simply selecting peaks from pairs chosen at ran-
dom is computationally unfeasible. Instead, where possible, we
force the properties that are required (for example, we only sample
from the tail of a Gaussian distribution to select δ > δc), and then
weight the chosen pairs by the likelihood of making that selection
in a full multi-variate analysis. This gives a weighted distribution
with the same statistical properties as selecting a true Monte-Carlo
sample, but is computationally faster for determining the properties
of the distribution.
The expected amplitude of the pair-velocity h|υ1 − υ2|i for
galaxies selected at peaks, is plotted in Fig. 3 for halos of mass
1010...15 M⊙. The expected pair-velocities differ from those of the
mass, because peaks are more likely to be approaching each other
than moving apart at large separations. The evolution in the cor-
relation function depends on the derivative of the expected pair-
velocity, which controls the net change of pairs with a given sep-
aration (when the distances travelled are small). As we move to
increasing separation, the peak pair-velocity increases rapidly, but
then turns over and starts to decrease. This will lead to the corre-
lation function decreasing on small scales, and increasing on large
scales.
We have constructed a weighted Monte-Carlo distribution of
3 × 108 galaxy pairs selected at the peaks in a Gaussian random
ﬁeld, smoothed by a Gaussian ﬁlter with width corresponding to a
c(cid:13) 2007 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–5
Peculiar velocities and evolution-bias
demonstrated this from both analytic arguments and a Monte-Carlo
procedure based on the work of Regos & Szalay (1995). Evolution-
bias provides a mechanism for producing a scale-dependent bias
in 2-pt correlation measurements, whose importance grows as the
galaxies move, and consequently depends on the time since galaxy
formation. Note that the overall bias of a galaxy sample would, in
general, be expected to be a decreasing function of time because
this depends on the increasing amplitude of the clustering of the
matter ﬁeld.
The inclusion of evolution-bias in a combined model of galaxy
bias would predict that older galaxies have a scale dependent bias
with a correlation function whose shape is less like that of the mat-
ter ﬁeld than a population of younger galaxies. In the most simple
model, the red luminosity of an individual galaxy increases and
then fades with time. Galaxies can also merge together, forming
larger, brighter objects. The oldest ﬁeld galaxies tend to be faintest,
and should be most affected by scale-dependent biasing on large
scales. Such a description might explain why the SDSS LRGs and
2dFGRS galaxies seem to match a simple prescription for galaxy
bias, while the SDSS main galaxies do not (Sanchez & Cole 2007):
The SDSS main galaxies sample would contain these old ﬁeld
galaxies. The evolution-bias considered here would also impact on
measurements of the Baryon Acoustic Oscillation scale length from
the power spectrum or correlation function. Further simulations,
such as provided by semi-analytic techniques, which combine for-
mation and evolution-bias, are required to consider this mechanism
in more detail and apply it to speciﬁc galaxy types.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
WJP and BMS are grateful for support from STFC.
REFERENCES
Bardeen J. M., Bond J. R., Kaiser N., Szalay A. S., 1986, ApJ,
304, 15
Cole S., et al., 2005, MNRAS, 362, 505
Colless M., et al., 2003, astro-ph/0306581
Croom S. M., et al., 2005, MNRAS, 356, 415
Dekel A., Lahav O., 1999, ApJ, 520, 24
Eisenstein D. J., et al., 2005, ApJ, 633, 560
Fry J. N., 1996, ApJL, 461, L65+
Norberg P., et al., 2001, MNRAS, 328, 64
Peacock J. A., Lumsden S. L., Heavens A. F., 1987, MNRAS, 229,
Percival W. J., et al., 2007, ApJ, 657, 645
Regos E., Szalay A. S., 1995, MNRAS, 272, 447
Sanchez A. G., Cole S., 2007, astro-ph/0708.1517, 708
Sugiyama N., 1995, ApJ Suppl., 100, 281
Swanson M. E. C., Tegmark M., Blanton M., Zehavi I., 2007,
astro-ph/0702584
Szalay A. S., Jensen L. G., 1987, Acta Physica Hungarica, 62, 263
Tegmark M., et al., 2004, ApJ, 606, 702
Tegmark M., et al., 2006, Phys. Rev. D, 74, 123507
Tegmark M., Peebles P. J. E., 1998, ApJL, 500, L79+
York D. G., et al., 2000, AJ, 120, 1579
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/ LATEX ﬁle prepared by the
author.
Figure 4. The correlation functions recovered from propagating pairs of
galaxies along their peculiar velocities, divided by those expected from lin-
ear evolution of the density ﬁeld. Correlation functions at z = 0 (circles),
z = 1 (triangles) and z = 2 (squares), were calculated from a Monte-Carlo
realisation of 108 independent pairs of points in a Gaussian random ﬁeld
(lower lines), and from 3 × 108 weighted peaks in a Gaussian random ﬁeld
smoothed with a Gaussian ﬁlter corresponding to a halo mass of 1012 M⊙
(upper lines).
halo mass 1012 M⊙. In order to demonstrate the effect of peak selec-
tion on the galaxy correlation function, we have followed the evolu-
tion of galaxies pairs from an initially unclustered distribution. This
matches the analysis of pairs of galaxies selected at random from
the matter distribution that led to Fig. 2, but selects special locations
in the velocity ﬁeld. The ratios between the recovered galaxy corre-
lation functions and those expected for the matter at z = 0, 1, 2, are
shown in Fig. 4. As we move from small to large scales, the bias at
any redshift initially decreases, because of the change in expected
infall velocity shown in Fig. 3, but then increases beyond that of
the matter ﬁeld, as expected from the analytic arguments discussed
in Sect. 4. Due to the fact that galaxies only pick up their pecu-
liar velocities after formation, this plot should not be interpreted
as giving the actual galaxy correlation functions for peaks. To do
this, we would need to specify galaxy formation times and their
spatial distribution (or formation-bias). The relative effect of the
evolution-bias on ξ(r), however, should be the same, and this plot
demonstrates that bias is not a simple function of scale. The large-
scale bias is a decreasing function of time, as the amplitude of the
clustering of the matter ﬁeld grows to match the strong evolution-
bias predicted at early times.
6 SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
We have considered a decomposition of galaxy bias into formation-
bias and evolution-bias. The formation- and evolution-biases are
inter-related, with one tending to lead to the other: By choosing
special locations for galaxy formation, we also tend to choose loca-
tions that lead to group evolution that is very different from that of
particles selected at random in the matter ﬁeld. By analysing mod-
els of evolution-bias, we have argued that this component of bias
has some interesting properties within the peaks model. We have
c(cid:13) 2007 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1–5
